multistream simultaneous open protocol (#196)
libp2p/specs: connections/simopen.md

> # Simultaneous Open for multistream-select

Reviewer: This spec only applies to connection bootstrapping, whereas multistream-select is used in other contexts too (stream-level protocol negotiation). So I'd title this differently, e.g.:

```
# Connection bootstrapping: handling TCP simultaneous open in multistream-select.
```

Author: Sure, we can change the title. Go ahead and pick something you like!

Author: Also, this works for UDP too!

# Simultaneous Open for multistream-select

| Lifecycle Stage | Maturity      | Status | Latest Revision |
|-----------------|---------------|--------|-----------------|
| 1A              | Working Draft | Active | DRAFT           |

Authors: [@vyzo]

Interest Group: [@raulk], [@stebalien]

[@vyzo]: https://github.com/vyzo
[@raulk]: https://github.com/raulk
[@stebalien]: https://github.com/stebalien

See the [lifecycle document][lifecycle-spec] for context about maturity level
and spec status.

[lifecycle-spec]: https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/00-framework-01-spec-lifecycle.md

## Introduction

In order to support direct connections through NATs with hole
punching, we need to account for simultaneous open. In such cases,
there is no single initiator and responder, but instead both peers act

> as initiators. This is breaks protocol negotiation in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as initiators. This breaks protocol negotiation in
```

multistream-select, which assumes a single initator.

This draft proposes a simple extension to the multistream protocol
negotiation in order to select a single initator when both peers are
acting as such.

## The Protocol

When a peer acting as the initiator enters protocol negotiation, it
sends the string `iamclient` as first protocol selector. If the other
peers is a responder or doesn't support the extension, then it
responds with `na` and protocol negotiation continues as normal.

If both peers believe they are the initiator, then they both send
`iamclient`. If this is the case, they enter an initiator selection
phase, where one of the peers is selected to act as the initiator. In
order to do so, they both generate a random 256-bit integer and send
it as response to the `iamclient` directive, prefixed with the

> `select:` string. The peer with the highest integer is selected to act

Author: good point, this needs to be encoded! Let's do base64.

> `select:` string. The peer with the highest integer is selected to act

Author: Updated to mandate base64.

> # Simultaneous Open for bootstrapping connections in multistream-select

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Connection bootstrapping: Handling simultaneous open in multistream-select.
```

As per @raulk's comment in https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/196#discussion_r308391270.

| Lifecycle Stage | Maturity      | Status | Latest Revision |
|-----------------|---------------|--------|-----------------|

> | 1A              | Working Draft | Active | DRAFT           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| 1A              | Working Draft | Active | r0, 2021-05-06 |
```

Authors: [@vyzo]

Interest Group: [@raulk], [@stebalien]

[@vyzo]: https://github.com/vyzo
[@raulk]: https://github.com/raulk
[@stebalien]: https://github.com/stebalien

See the [lifecycle document][lifecycle-spec] for context about maturity level
and spec status.

[lifecycle-spec]: https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/00-framework-01-spec-lifecycle.md

## Introduction

In order to support direct connections through NATs with hole
punching, we need to account for simultaneous open. In such cases,
there is no single initiator and responder, but instead both peers act
as initiators. This breaks protocol negotiation in
multistream-select, which assumes a single initator.

This draft proposes a simple extension to the multistream protocol
negotiation in order to select a single initator when both peers are
acting as such.

## The Protocol

When a peer acting as the initiator enters protocol negotiation, it
sends the string `iamclient` as first protocol selector. If the other
peers is a responder or doesn't support the extension, then it

> responds with `na` and protocol negotiation continues as normal.

Reviewer 3: Note that the [rust-libp2p multistream-select implementation currently requires protocols to start with a `/`](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/blob/40c4287bc9a95461889e10612519960a16a2874f/misc/multistream-select/src/protocol.rs#L73-L82) and thus the `iamclient` message is not backwards compatible with rust-libp2p as it would not parse as a valid protocol identifier.

The specification recommends protocols to start with a `/`, but does not require it. The rust-libp2p implementation is thus not in-line with the specification.

> Each protocol supported by a peer is identified using a unique string called a protocol id. While any string can be used, the conventional format is a path-like structure containing a short name and a version number, separated by / characters. For example: /mplex/1.0.0 identifies version 1.0.0 of the mplex stream multiplexing protocol. multistream-select itself has a protocol id of /multistream/1.0.0.

https://github.com/libp2p/specs/tree/master/connections#protocol-negotiation

I am posting this not to ask the specification to change, but only to raise awareness in case other implementations are as strict as rust-libp2p. (//CC @vasco-santos for the js-libp2p side).

Reviewer 4: > Note that the rust-libp2p multistream-select implementation currently requires protocols to start with a /

This was done because the code that parses multistream-select payloads is context-free.
In other words, if we want to parse the string `"na"`, the code that does so doesn't know whether it should interpret it as a "not available" response or as a protocol named `"na"`.

Reviewer 5: It's still reasonable to change this, it's not used in practice anyways.

Really, it would likely make more sense as `/libp2p/simultaneous-connect`.

Reviewer 3: Though initially not intentioned, I am in favor of replacing `iamclient` with `/libp2p/simultaneous-connect`. This would both comply with the above mentioned convention to start (fake) protocol IDs with a `/` and be interoperable with the stateless parser in rust-libp2p.

I have opened https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/321 which would do the change in the specification. Please let me know what you think either on https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/321 or here.

If both peers believe they are the initiator, then they both send
`/libp2p/simultaneous-connect`. If this is the case, they enter an initiator
selection phase, where one of the peers is selected to act as the initiator. In

> order to do so, they both generate a random 256-bit integer and send it as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
order to do so, they both generate a random 64-bit integer and send it as
```

The Golang implementation is using a 64-bit integer:

```Golang
	myNonce := binary.LittleEndian.Uint64(randBytes)
```

https://github.com/multiformats/go-multistream/blob/4e1d9a7e25b067b7527ca2af72ce9c06529ebfb7/client.go#L167

it as response to the `iamclient` directive, prefixed with the

> `select:` string. The integer is in big-endian format, encoded in base64.

Reviewer 6: @vyzo Why do we need to encode to base64 here ?

Reviewer 7: I'd assume it's because multistream 1 is a text-based, human-readable protocol (with all the pros and cons that come with it).

That said, base64 seems like a suboptimal choice here. I propose switching to hexadecimal encoding. Encoding `math.MaxUint64` (18446744073709551615) is `0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF` in hex and `MTg0NDY3NDQwNzM3MDk1NTE2MTU=` in base64.
Also, 256 bits seem excessive here. I think we can live with a collision probability of 2^-64, which would allow implementations to use a regular `uint64` instead of `math/big.Int`. We might even want to limit this to 52 (?) bits to make things easier in JavaScript (but I'm no expert on that).

Reviewer 4: > Encoding math.MaxUint64 (18446744073709551615) is 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF in hex and MTg0NDY3NDQwNzM3MDk1NTE2MTU= in base64.

[I think it would be `//////////8=`](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=release&edition=2018&gist=ba311359861b6ab7459cc0345f57567b)

Reviewer 7: Would it? I used https://www.base64encode.net/, and that gives the same result (except for the last character?) as `echo 18446744073709551615 | base64`. But maybe that's decoding the string "18446744073709551615" and not the number?

As `/` is a separator we use in multistream, so base64 encoding might get us into trouble, if we don't escape it (one of the perks of using a text-based protocol...).

Reviewer 4: Yes I guess you're encoding the string.
It doesn't make sense that encoding something in base64 would give something longer than encoding that same thing in base16

I think that `/` isn't a problem because of the `select:` prefix. Otherwise I'd suggest base58.

Reviewer 7: Not opposed to base58, but not sure if that's easily accessible in all the languages we care about. In Go, we'd have to import a third-party library (it's not in the standard library).

Any thoughts on the length of this value?

> `select:` string. The integer is in big-endian format, encoded in base64. The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`select:` string. The integer is send in its base-10 string representation. The
```

The Golang implementation is sending the nonce in the base-10 string representation.

```Golang
		myselect := []byte(tieBreakerPrefix + strconv.FormatUint(myNonce, 10))
```

https://github.com/multiformats/go-multistream/blob/4e1d9a7e25b067b7527ca2af72ce9c06529ebfb7/client.go#L171

peer with the highest integer is selected to act as the initator and sends an
`initiator` message. The peer with the lowest integer responds with `responder`
message and both peers transition to protocol negotiation with a distinct
initiator.

Note the importance of the prefix in the random integer, as it allows
peers to match the selection token and ignore potentially pipelined
security protocol negotiation messages.

The following schematic illustrates, for the case where A's integer is
higher than B's integer:

```
A ---> B: /libp2p/simultaneous-connect
B ---> A: /libp2p/simultaneous-connect
A: generate random integer IA
B: generate random integer IB
A ---> B: select:{IA}
B ---> A: select:{IB}
A ---> B: initiator
B ---> A: responder
```

> In the unlikely case where both peers selected the same integer, they
> generate a fresh one and enter another round of the protocol. If
> multiple rounds of the protocol result in the same integers, this is
> indicative of a bug and both peers should abort the connection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the unlikely case where both peers selected the same integer, connection establishment fails.
```

The Golang implementation does not retry. See https://github.com/multiformats/go-multistream/pull/42#discussion_r558755480.

B ---> A: iamclient
A: generate random integer IA
B: generate random integer IB
A ---> B: select:{IA}
B ---> A: select:{IB}
A ---> B: initiator
B ---> A: responder
```

In the unlikely case where both peers selected the same integer, they

> generate a fresh one and enter another round of the protocol. If

Reviewer 8: In the case where both peers select the same integer could they use their peer ids as a tie-breaker (eg lowest wins)?

Reviewer 2: multistream has no concept of peer ids which prevents us from doing this, otherwise we could avoid the random number altogether.

Reviewer 4: This look a bit like an implementation detail to me.
Rust-libp2p is using the lowest `PeerId` to determine who has priority in case of simultaneous connection.

Reviewer: We can make this an arbitrary byte string. The advantage of using a peer ID here is that, later (after handshaking), we _could_ validate if the peer was honest, and disconnect/blacklist it if dishonest. Rationale: if I'm dishonest, I can make myself win this challenge always by sending 0. Not that this will gain me any advantage that I can think of, but it's a nuance worth considering.

Reviewer: We could also mitigate this by making peers hash the received nonce (e.g. SHA256) prior to comparison.

Reviewer: @tomaka curious to learn you already have an implementation. Mind posting a pointer to the code?

Author: I don't think we should even have the concept of a peer id in multistream, this is at the bottom of the stack.
We could use hashing, but does it really gain anything?

Reviewer 4: > @tomaka curious to learn you already have an implementation. Mind posting a pointer to the code?

Rust-libp2p doesn't implement UDP or hole punching, so we're not doing this in the scope of what this PR is about. Rust-libp2p only ever allows one connection between two given peers, and if we detect two active connections, the one with the lowest `PeerId` has the dialing priority and the other one is shut down.

Here's the code that handles an incoming connection for which we learned the `PeerId` of the remote: https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/blob/2fd941122a6c589501ad1c04b0f091f1337f5f49/core/src/nodes/network.rs#L1130-L1196

Reviewer 3: This discussion seems to have stalled. The spec has settled on a random integer instead of a peer ID. Please un-resolve in case you would like to continue this discussion.
